Add TS release blog post (#1303)
temporalio/documentation: blog/2022-07-15-typescript-1.0.0.md

# 1.0.0 release of our TypeScript SDK

After almost 2 years of development, 728 commits, 431 pull requests, and 48 releases we're finally releasing the stable
version of the Temporal TypeScript SDK.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<!--truncate-->

```

Author: What's this?

Reviewer 2: https://docusaurus.io/docs/blog#blog-list

The SDK was designed with TypeScript-first developer experience in mind, but works equally well with JavaScript.

## What makes this SDK unique?

### Shared Core

This is the first stable SDK built on top of a shared Rust [Core SDK](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-core/). 

> The development of the Core SDK was started roughly around the time we started to develop the TypeScript SDK and the API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The development of the Core SDK was started roughly around the time we started to develop the TypeScript SDK, and the API
```

boundary between the two evolved over time.

By investing in a shared Core, we can reuse lot of the complex concurrency management and state machine logic to build

> new SDKs much faster. For example our - now in Alpha - Python SDK was built in just a few months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new SDKs much faster. For example, our Python SDK (currently in Alpha) was built in just a few months.
```
Other possible treatments:
- our now-in-Alpha Python
- our (now in Alpha) Python

> Sharing the logic makes all of our SDKs more reliable too since when a problem is fixed in Core it is fixed for any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sharing the logic makes all of our SDKs more reliable because when a problem is fixed in Core it is fixed for any
```

dependent SDK.

### Sandboxed workflow runtime

The SDK leverages V8 isolates (the technology behind Chrome's isolation) to run each workflow in an isolated JavaScript

> runtime with a distinct global scope and prevents the use of "unsafe" JavaScript modules which could break the code's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
runtime with a distinct global scope and to prevent the use of "unsafe" JavaScript modules that could break the code's
```

[deterministic constraints](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#deterministic-constraints).

> All non-deterministic JavaScript APIs such as getting the current time and a random number have been replaced with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All non-deterministic JavaScript APIs, such as getting the current time or a random number, have been replaced with
```

deterministic versions.

> With all of this put together we've eliminated an entire class of footguns and made it easier to get started with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With all of this put together, we eliminated an entire class of footguns and made it easier to get started with
```
Love the imagery!

Temporal.

## Built with the community

When we released the first Alpha of the SDK back in March of 2021, we set out to iterate on the public API and have
asked our community of users to help us shape it.

We've been very fortunate to have gotten such wide adoption for an SDK at such an early stage.

> The SDK's slack channel has grown to over 1000 members and we've been actively responding and supporting users on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK's Slack channel has grown to more than 1000 members, and we've been actively responding and supporting users on a
```

daily basis.

> The feedback and trust we've gotten from our early adopters to put the SDK in production has been invaluable and we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feedback and trust we've gotten from our early adopters to put the SDK in production has been invaluable. We
```

wouldn't have been able to reach API and functional stability without them.

## The journey

Since the first release of the SDK, we've made significant changes to the public API.

> We went from workflows that look like this where a workflow interface was required, we relied on path aliases and the
> workflow name was based on their containing file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We went from workflows that look like this where a workflow interface was required, we relied on path aliases, and the
workflow name was based on the containing file—
```

```ts
import { Example } from '@interfaces/workflows';
import { greet } from '@activities/greeter';

async function main(name: string): Promise<string> {
  const greeting = await greet(name);
  console.log(greeting);
}

export const workflow: Example = { main };
```

> To this where activities are proxied using their types and workflows names function names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
—to this where activities are proxied using their types and workflows names function names—
```
Is something missing in "and workflows names function names"?

```ts
import { createActivityHandle } from '@temporalio/workflow';
import { Example } from '../interfaces';
import type * as activities from '../activities';

const { greet } = createActivityHandle<typeof activities>({
  startToCloseTimeout: '1 minute',
});

export const example: Example = (name: string) => ({
  async execute(): Promise<string> {
    return await greet(name);
  },
});
```

> To where we are today where workflows are just functions and don't require interface definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
—to where we are today where workflows are just functions and don't require interface definitions.
```

```ts
import { proxyActivities } from '@temporalio/workflow';
import type * as activities from './activities';

const { greet } = proxyActivities<typeof activities>({
  startToCloseTimeout: '1 minute',
});

export async function example(name: string): Promise<string> {
  return await greet(name);
}
```

## The future

> Now that the SDK is stable we will be investing in even safer APIs to help steer users in the right path by avoiding
> common anti-patterns.
> We'll build high level abstractions that make writing workflows with long histories easier.
> Lastly we will invest in developer tools that will make the local development experience better like IDE plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the SDK is stable, we will invest in even safer APIs to help steer users in the right path by avoiding
common anti-patterns.
We'll build high-level abstractions that make writing workflows with long histories easier.
And we will invest in developer tools that make the local development experience better, like IDE plugins.
```

author_image_url: /img/roey-loren.jpg
---

After almost 2 years of development, 730 commits, 434 pull requests, and 48 releases, we've finally published the stable
`1.0.0` version of the Temporal TypeScript SDK. In this post, we'll share what's special about this SDK, how it's been
built, how we've improved the API, and our future plans.

<!--truncate-->

> For those new to [Temporal](https://temporal.io/), We think of it as a "durable code execution framework." We execute
> your backend code in a durable fashion: by persisting each step your program takes, we can recover your program's
> state in the event of failure—even if the machine goes offline or loses power in the middle of execution. We also
> durably retry and timeout external calls, so if your services or databases are unreachable or returning errors, we
> will keep retrying until they're back in a good state. This allows backend engineers to develop at a new, higher level
> of abstraction that is oblivious to faults in the system. See also a [video
> introduction](https://twitter.com/lorendsr/status/1544806504443695104?s=20&t=XFYNWSB8BEroAhjA6ATDPQ) and [formal
> definition](https://docs.temporal.io/temporal).

> The SDK was designed with TypeScript-first developer experience in mind, but works equally well with JavaScript.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like:

The SDK is built to run in Node, and you can use it from JavaScript or TypeScript code.

> The SDK was designed with TypeScript-first developer experience in mind, but works equally well with JavaScript.

Author: I'd say: `We call it the TypeScript SDK but it was designed for TypeScript and JavaScript developers alike`

> The SDK was designed with TypeScript-first developer experience in mind, but works equally well with JavaScript.

Reviewer: I like it. To avoid passive voice, I suggest "We call it the TypeScript SDK, but we designed it for TypeScript and JavaScript developers alike."

## What makes this SDK unique?

> ### Shared Core

Author: I think I get what you mean, let me try

This is the first stable SDK built on top of a shared Rust Core SDK (see [blog
post](https://docs.temporal.io/blog/why-rust-powers-core-sdk/) and [repo](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-core/)). The
development of the Core SDK was started roughly around the time we started to develop the TypeScript SDK, and the API
boundary between the two evolved over time.

> By investing in a shared Core, we can reuse a lot of the complex concurrency management and state machine logic to build

Author: Not sure either..

> By investing in a shared Core, we can reuse a lot of the complex concurrency management and state machine logic to build

Reviewer: We can make a case either way. I recommend capitalizing "Core" because we do publish it on GitHub.

> new SDKs much faster. For example, our [Python SDK](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-python) (currently in alpha) was

Reviewer 2: The longer period of time it took to get TS to the same place. Should we include that?

> built in just a few months. Sharing the logic makes all of our SDKs more reliable because when a problem is fixed in

Author: I'll try to make the point clearer

Core, it is fixed for all Core-based SDKs.

> ### Sandboxed workflow runtime

Author: 👍

> ### Sandboxed workflow runtime

Author: I think this is mostly covered by:
> With all of this put together, we eliminated an entire class of footguns and made it easier to get started with
Temporal.

I'll add:
> Realizing the benefits of the deterministic runtime, we've set the tone for the future of Temporal SDKs. We'll strive to bring this added safety to the older and upcoming SDKs.

The SDK leverages V8 isolates (the technology behind Chrome's isolation) to run each Workflow in an isolated JavaScript
runtime to get a distinct global scope and to prevent the use of "unsafe" JavaScript modules that could break the code's
[deterministic constraints](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#deterministic-constraints). All non-deterministic
JavaScript APIs, such as getting the current time or a random number, have been replaced with [deterministic
versions](https://docs.temporal.io/typescript/determinism#sources-of-non-determinism).

With all of this put together, we eliminated an entire class of footguns and made it easier to get started with
Temporal.

## Built with the community

When we released the first alpha version of the SDK back in March of 2021, we set out to iterate on the public API and
have asked our community of users to help us shape it.

We've been very fortunate to have gotten such wide adoption for an SDK at such an early stage. The SDK's Slack channel
([#typescript-sdk](https://temporal.io/slack)) has grown to more than 1000 members, and we've been actively responding
to and supporting users on a daily basis.

> The feedback and trust we've gotten from our early adopters who put the SDK in production has been invaluable. We

Author: SGTM

> The feedback and trust we've gotten from our early adopters who put the SDK in production has been invaluable. We

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The feedback and trust we've gotten from our early adopters have been invaluable. We
```

Author: Fixed locally, should be `has been invaluable`.

wouldn't have been able to reach API and functional stability without them. Thank you for putting up with our [many
breaking changes](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-typescript/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) during the alpha and beta. We are

> committed to avoiding backward-incompatible changes from now on.

Author: After some further discussion, I think we can limit this to core APIs and runtime compat.

> committed to avoiding backward-incompatible changes from now on.

Author: (a.k.a history compatibility)

> committed to avoiding backward-incompatible changes from now on.

Author: Changed to:
```
From now on, we
are committed to maintain backwards-compatibility for Core APIs and history replayablity, and to miminize
backward-incompatible changes for non-Core APIs.
```

[joebowbeer](https://github.com/joebowbeer), [andreasasprou](https://github.com/andreasasprou), and
[jameslnewell](https://github.com/jameslnewell)—and to [swyx](https://twitter.com/swyx) for writing and recording most
of the [docs and tutorials](https://docs.temporal.io/typescript/introduction/) and tirelessly advocating for API
simplication. We welcome more involvement from anyone, from helping answer community questions to submitting issues or
PRs—check out [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-typescript/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more
information.

## The journey

Since the first release of the SDK, we've made significant changes to the public API.

We went from Workflows that look like this, where a Workflow interface was required, we relied on path aliases, and the
Workflow name was based on the containing file—

```ts
import { Example } from '@interfaces/workflows';
import { greet } from '@activities/greeter';

async function main(name: string): Promise<string> {
  const greeting = await greet(name);
  console.log(greeting);
}

export const workflow: Example = { main };
```

> —to this, where Activities are proxied using their types and Workflows names are function names—

Reviewer 3: I would more clearly label these example snippets, maybe with timestamps to show they are a timeline.

Author: Yeah, I was thinking about this too

```ts
import { createActivityHandle } from '@temporalio/workflow';
import { Example } from '../interfaces';
import type * as activities from '../activities';

const { greet } = createActivityHandle<typeof activities>({
  startToCloseTimeout: '1 minute',
});

export const example: Example = (name: string) => ({
  async execute(): Promise<string> {
    return await greet(name);
  },
});
```

—to where we are today, where Workflows are just functions and don't require interface definitions:

```ts
import { proxyActivities } from '@temporalio/workflow';
import type * as activities from './activities';

const { greet } = proxyActivities<typeof activities>({
  startToCloseTimeout: '1 minute',
});

export async function example(name: string): Promise<string> {
  return await greet(name);
}
```

## The future

Now that the SDK is stable, we will invest in even safer APIs to help steer users in the right direction by avoiding
common anti-patterns. We'll build high-level abstractions that make writing Workflows with long histories easier. And we

> will invest in developer tools that make the local development experience better, like IDE plugins.

Author: What should we announce then?
